Why do we write? A trivial answer is communication. But is everything that has been ever written been written to be communicated. What about people’s journals? Some people go as far as even making a will to burn them down upon death. That journal never gets read, sometimes even by the author himself. Then, what on earth causes this urge in us to write things down?

People may have this urge to write their things down for the purpose of the craft of writing. Similar to a painter’s urge to capture the perfect colors, the perfect lines and the perfect shades, a writer feels this urge to precisely capture the moment, everything from the physical to the emotional that defines that moment. The writer essentially wants the reader- who could be the writer himself after having written it- to feel what he is feeling at that precise moment. But writers face a common problem in trying to capture the moment - the fact that the moment is defined by so many variables leading up to that moment. So, now in order to tell the reader how I felt today, I must go back in time and describe how I felt yesterday and how that shaped my feelings today. Tolstoy struggles with this precise problem in his essay “A history of yesterday”. He embarks on a journey to precisely write down how his yesterday was. But in order to fully describe yesterday he has to describe what he did the day before yesterday- in order to tell the reader why he woke up late yesterday, he has to describe the game of cards that he played until very late the day before yesterday. This leads him to a spiral where he ends up describing most of the day before yesterday and he barely reaches yesterday at the end. He goes in a circle and ends up at the starting point- the morning of yesterday. 

War and Peace is basically an extended version of this problem that Tolstoy and many writers faced. In order to describe the exact causes of the 1814 war he starts the story at 1809. He tracks diverse characters- ranging in ranks and social hierarchy- from the start to the end of several wars. I think Tolstoy succeeds to at least make it clear why he needed to write this grand volume- why he needed to spend literally hundreds of pages with details that would boggle a sane reader- he wanted to capture that brief second in the war or in the peace in family and in order to perfectly do that, the reader needs to know everything that led to that moment. 

But I haven’t still described why humans feel this urge to capture the moment. The first reason I see is because they are mortals. Capturing the moment precisely lets that person’s life to transcendent time- as I read Anna Karenina today, I can still feel the thoughts going through Alexei’s minds while he nervously cracks his finger joints- over a century later after Anna Karenina has been written, I can feel the tenseness of Alexei’s situation just from reading a couple of paragraphs. Tolstoy and the prototypes whom he based the character Alexei are long dead but their lives transcendent times. And I think it is an astonishing feat. 